# drug_deaths

This is an attempt to try to predict opioid overdose death rates based on census data. The Jupyter notebook on the "master" branch details a first attempt in which selected county-level data from the 2010 census and 2014 American Communities Survey are used to try to predict the death rate per 100,000 people in each county, categorized into 16 levels basically spanning the range 0-32 in steps of 2, with the final category being 31 and over. At the 16-class level, the results were extremely poor, so the categories were collapsed, first to 8, then 4 and, finally, 2. The results for binary classification were not particularly good, with the optimized model attaining a Matthews correlation coefficient of about .46 and an ROC-AUC score of .73, even with an adjustment in the high/low threshold to produce almost balanced classes.

Variance inflation analysis was used for feature selection, due to fairly strong correlations among the features. Additionally, the presence of a very high number of outliers made removing them unfeasible, so robust scaling was used in the optimization process. A second Jupyter notebook, on the "robust" branch, details a second attempt that essentially follows the model of the first but tries two scaling methods — robust scaling and quantile transformation — starting with the feature selection stage. Robust scaling worked better and a slightly different feature set was selected. The results did not significantly improve on the first attempt. A gradient boosting classifier did achieve a higher score, but optimizing on a different data split produced a much lower score, so it was not a stable model.

The conclusion is that census data by itself cannot be used to obtain accurate predictions of county death rates attributed to the opiod crisis, even at the simplest level of a binary classification into high and low rates.
